When we have cats, they talk to us constantly with different vocalizations. We can tell a lot about a cat’s mood by how they interact with us using their body language and voice.

In this article, we will explore how cats communicate with us and how we can better understand them. This will help our relationships flourish, creating a mutually beneficial scenario for both parties. The more you can understand your cat, the better off you’ll be.
Understanding Cat Vocalizations
Before you can learn how to talk to a cat, you first have to understand how cats communicate. Our cats have a multitude of ways to communicate with others. They have actions to convey emotion all throughout the spectrum, ranging from positive to negative. Below are some cat vocalizations, along with what they mean. Understanding each one will help you identify what kind of mood your cat is in and what they could be trying to convey to you.

Meowing
Everyone has heard a cat meow. It’s one of the main vocalizations they use to get your attention. They can meow when they are both happy or disgruntled, so it’s important to take note of other body language cues to see what kind of mood your cat is in.

For example, they might give you a happy meow upon your arrival home after a long day. Or you might still need to fill the food bowl, and they are demanding their dinner with an angry meow.

Purring
We often correlate purring with being completely content or happy. That is the case in a majority of situations. However, cats also purr when they are healing. For example, if your cat were in pain, they might purr to send a frequency to the body to generate healing.
Chirp/Trill/Chirrup
The chirp, trill, or chirrup is often a greeting reserved for their people. It’s a long, drawn-out mix between a meow and a purr, creating a rolling R that many other languages are likely impressed by!

Chatter
If you have ever heard a chatter, you might wonder, “What on earth is wrong with that cat?” They are in the zone; they are fierce; they are ready. They want to sink their teeth into that bird on the ledge so bad they can taste it. They want to prey upon the innocent chipmunk in the tree, but they can’t.

So, chattering is often thought to be a sign of pent-up predatory frustration. We’ve all heard chattering, even if it wasn’t firsthand. All the funny cat videos on the Internet incorporate chattering of some kind. After all, it is quite hilarious when you hear a cat make this vocalization.

Body Language Cues
Often, vocalizations can be used for a variety of situations, but cats can also communicate with their body language. Sometimes a cat’s body language means business, other times, they’re being cheerful, and sometimes, they’re plain disgruntled. So how do you know? We have the details!

Tail
Tail Twitching: Tail twitching typically means your cat is being anxious or watchful. For example, if there is a predator or potential pest nearby, your cat might start flicking their tail and watching the behavior of this other animal very intently.
Tail Fur Sticking Up: Sometimes, when cats get freaked out, the hair on their back stands straight up. You can think of a classic Halloween cat when you see this. A cat in this stance may be ready to attack, so never approach them directly. If you have spooked them, just give them their time to calm down before attempting to interact.
Tail Tucked, Hunched: If your cat is tucking their tail and running for cover, something is probably happening in their surroundings that has scared them into seclusion. The best thing you can do in this scenario is give your cat the space they need until they’re ready to interact.
Tail Straight Up and Curled: If the tail is standing perky and curled slightly at the end, whatever is going on? Typically, this is what they do when they are content and curious about their surroundings.
Tail Stand Straight, But Low: If you see a cat’s tail is completely straight but curled downward, this can signal extreme aggression and could mean a fight is in place, depending on the surroundings. Other vocalizations like hissing and growling usually accompany this.

Rule 1: Sound over Sight
 
This is the cardinal rule behind my nyaccent.  While I have seen similar accent forms around, some of them make me want to cringe because of one key issue: words that are too far mangled or stretched in order to accommodate said accent.

I make it a point to include at least one oral proofread in the editing stage of every story I write, so my nyaccent isn’t based on text, but rather on actual spoken words.  While “n,” followed by “y” are the most common letters to fall under the nyaccent rules, there are clear exceptions and other, sneakier cases.

Examples:
 
Words such as “need, planning”, and “year” are unaffected solely because the difference between how the original and potentially altered versions are spoken is simply too much of a stretch to be plausible.  I put a lot of emphasis on the tactile sensations speaking creates on my tongue and throat; the “y” and long “e” sounds for the previously stated words just feels too distant from the “ny” sound.  My nyaccent is supposed to feel natural; the altered and original versions of the words have to at least be close.

Conversely, words such as “universe, magic,” and “immune” do fall under my nyaccent’s rules, becoming “nyunyaverse, nyagic,” and “innyune,” respectively.  While obviously not exact, the sensations that they leave on the tongue and throat are still similar.  The guidelines for these types of words will be covered under Rule 4.

Rule 2: Which Sounds are Unchanged
 
Obviously, going with the default of “nya,” it would make sense that “n” and “y” sounds would be singled out.  However, that alone isn’t enough.

In the majority of cases, it is, in fact, the “n” that is the trigger, but not all “n’s” are triggers.  Take the word “ground,” for example; trying to alter it via the nyaccent is so awkward that an extra syllable would have to be added.

Rule 2.1:  Any “n” that combines its sound with a consonant or long “e” sound like in “need” is left alone.
 
As an example, I will now state Rule 2.1, itself, using my nyaccent: “Any “n” that combines its sound with a consonyant or long “e” sound like in “need” is left alone-nya.”

Notice how I only altered the word “consonant” out of the nine or so words containing or being entirely composed of the letter “n.”  As for the ending “nya,” that’ll be covered under Rule 6.

Rule 2.2: In addition to what Rule 2.1 states about “n” sounds, strong “y” sounds like in “yarn,” “yodel,” and “yes” are also left alone.

If I were to state the Rule 2.2 in my nyaccent, none of the words with “y’s” would be altered.  There was a time when I did, but oral proofreads proved that the flow just wasn’t there.  This pretty much leaves only a few, weaker “y” sounds left.  Specifically, the “y” sounds like in “yeah” or “you” are the more common “y” triggers, but there are others.

Rule 3: The Strong and the Weak

Out of all the triggers for my nyaccent, two different groupings stand out: “nya” and “nyu.”  These two are known as the strong sounds because they are the closest to a cat’s meowing.  There are also weak sounds like in “finyish” and “punyish” that are sometimes overshadowed or replaced by strong sounds depending on the context of the pronunciation.  Finally, moderate sounds like in “nyext,” “nyor,” etc. don’t trump any other sounds, but at the same time, they don’t get replaced.

Rule 3.1: For moderate and weak sounds, simply add the “y” or “n” into the word at the appropriate place.  For strong sounds, alter the vowels to the set used by “nya” and “nyu.”  Applying Rule 7.4 is the exception (explained later).
 
Following these guidelines, “occasional” would become “occasionyal,” “next” becomes “nyext,” and “finish” becomes “finyish.”

However, the strong sounds tend to alter the original word more than any other, therefore “knew” becomes “knyu” and “nothing” becomes nyathing.”
 
Rule 3.2: If both a strong sound and a weak sound are plausible, the amount of stress during pronunciation on the word portion to be altered determines which sound is used, strong for strong and weak for weak.
 
A good example of this rule is “punish” vs. “punishment.”  “Punish” merely becomes “punyish” because of the relatively low emphasis on the “n” sound; however, “punishment” becomes “punyashment” because the “n” now has a stronger emphasis.  Unfortunately, Rule 3.2 is a little gray because differing native accents can leave this phenomenon open to interpretation.

Rule 4: The Hidden Sounds

In addition to the typical “n” and occasional “y” sounds, there are also more cleverly hidden examples of words that are also affected.  However, they all have one thing in common:

Rule 4.1: Only the strong sounds (“nya” and “nyu”) will result from Rule 4.
 
Some like “universe” and “million” may not stand out until said out loud, but there is a weak “y” sound present, which is transformed into a “nyu” sound because of Rule 1.  “Universe” becomes “nyunyaverse” and “million” becomes “millnyan.”  Also of note is that the second vowel turns from an “i” to an “a” in “universe” due to Rule 3.2.

Rule 4.2: For “nya” sounds, look for certain “ma” pairings and words starting with “a.” 

Rule 4.2 calls for a very specific condition in both cases; the vowel must be pronounced very specifically like the “a” in “apple” or “magic.”  “Apple” becomes “nyapple” and “magic” becomes “nyagic.”  By applying Rule 1, it possible to see how close the two actually are.  There are many red herrings to watch out for, however.  With words like “addition” or “making,” although they do have the correct lettering, the “a” is pronounced a little differently; therefore, they do not fall under this rule.

Rule 4.3: For “nyu” sounds, look for certain “hu” and “mu” pairings; “ew” instead of “u” is also acceptable for these cases.
 
A hidden “nyu” is generally easier to find than a hidden “nya.”  Yet again, only a specific pronunciation is used, but the ambiguity is far less.  In both cases, I look for the same “u” sound as in “human”, “mew,” or “immune.”  “Human” becomes “nyuman,” “mew” becomes “nyu,” and “immune” becomes “innyune” (the first “m” is also altered to accommodate the sound change and satisfy Rule 7.4).

Rule 5: The Between “Nya” Rule
 
This rule is easily one of the trickier rules to follow and one of the hardest to grasp.  The reason that it’s necessary calls back, once again, to Rule 1.  There are certain words that are altered under specific conditions.  Do you remember me saying that “addition” doesn’t fall under Rule 4.2?  Well there are times when it is altered regardless thanks to Rule 5.

Example: “I nyu that there were problems with the nyu addition, but I did nyat knyow that there was also a pest problem in-nyaddition.  Nyaaa…”

Notice how even though “addition” is mentioned twice, it’s only altered once?  This is due to Rule 5, The Between “Nya” Rule.  The concept is that sometimes, the “nya,” “nyu,” or other nyaccent sounds actually form in between certain words when they’re spoken in quick succession.

Rule 5.1: Whenever a word ending in an “n” sound is followed by a word beginning with vowel sound that has a corresponding nyaccent version without any significant pause between the two, the sound forms at the beginning of the second word and they’re hyphenated together to show the relation.

Rule 5.2: Rule 5.1 only applies to strong and moderate sounds; weak sounds are excluded.  Rule 1 must be heeded, as well.

First of all, while most instances of Rule 5 do involve words ending in “n,” words such as “gone” and “bone” can also serve as triggers due to Rule 1.

There’s also a little quirk involving “an” and “and.”  “An” is trigger, one of the most common ones in fact, but “and” will not be unless it becomes triggered itself and changed into its “nyan” form like in the following example:

“Nyu made both cake and ice cream?  NYAAA!  Nyu also made cheese gratin-nyan-nyextra cookies?  Nyor so nyice.  Nyaaa...”
 
As you can see, it’s also possible to chain more than two words together using Rule 5, as long as they meet the conditions.

Rule 6: The Kitty’s “Nya” and “Nyaaa”

In addition to being a strong sound, “nya” has another use, one that most nekomimi fans would be quite familiar with.

Rule 6.1: Many short, one-syllable expressions like “Yay!,” “Huh?,” “What?,” “Yeah,” etc. are replaced with “nya” followed by the appropriate punctuation.  The context must be able to indicate the association.

This shouldn’t be too hard to understand; the speaker is merely mewing instead of saying the actual word.  However, the rest of the text needs to be phrased in such a way that the reader understands this via context.

There are also some exceptions though, most notably the word “oh”.

When used in this manner, “nya” is essentially a quick burst of emotion.

Original:  

Yeah, I really liked it.
Huh?  What do you mean?
Yikes!  That’s really scary!
Oh no!  What have I done?
Oh, that makes a lot more sense.


Nyaccented:

Nya, I really liked it.
Nya?  What do nyu mean?
Nya!  That’s really scary!
Oh nyo!  What have I done?
Oh, that makes a lot more sense-nya.


Rule 6.2: Some longer expressions of emotion like “awww” or actual sighing, moaning, or screaming are replaced with “nyaaa.”  The context must be able to indicate the association.
 
While used in a similar manner to “nya” in regards to Rule 6, “nyaaa” indicates a longer, more committed, emotional expression.  Because of this, word substitution is not as common with “nyaaa” as it is with “nya.”  Instead, “nyaaa” can seem to spontaneously appear when my nyaccent is applied.

Original:
 
Awww, how is it that I’ve never seen something so cute?
I really wish I could’ve gotten a better grade on the test.
EEEEE!  It’s a ghost!


Nyaccented:

Nyaaa, how is it that I’ve nyever seen something so cute?
Nyaaa, I really wish I could’ve gotten a better grade on the test.
NYAAA!  It’s a ghost!


Both of these rules help to add personality to the character in question and can be applied to more types of emotional expression than what the examples show.

Rule 6.3: Sentences are occasionally ended with “nya” or “nyaaa” when appropriate.  Every time “nya” is used in this way, it is hyphenated to the preceding word to show the quick transition.  The same applies to “nyaaa” when doing so doesn’t alter the flow of the sentence.  If it does, it is separated into its own sentence followed by three periods.

Examples:

Ah ha!  I have nyu!  There’s nyo way nyu can get away-nya!
Can we please go out for ice cream?  I promise I’ll be good-nya.
Is it true that we ran-nyout of liver-nya?
I could cuddle that bunny all day-nyaaa.
How could I lose my keys at a time like this?  Nyaaa…


Ending one’s sentences with “nya” is a common tactic, adding that adorable little meow to a character.  However, I try to differentiate from that practice a bit.  My ending “nya’s” and “nyaaa’s” are meant to be extra bursts of emotion that the sentence otherwise may not communicate.  This also means that the frequency of ending “nya’s” can seem random at first glance.  However, there is a method to the madness.

Rule 6.4: How often ending “nya’s” are applied depends on both the placement of altered words and the emotional state of the speaker.  Altered words don’t have ending “nya’s” attached to them and close proximity of said words can sometimes take on the emotional burden instead, depending on the context.  Conversely, If the speaker is in an agitated, panicked, or excited emotional state, ending “nya’s” become more frequent.

Examples:
Can I go with nyu?
Why would nyu do that?  It’s nyat nyice!
What will we do-nya?  We’re completely surrounded!  Should we surrender-nya?  Is there any hope-nya?


Sometimes, one could go several paragraphs without seeing”-nya” if there are a large amount of altered words, or not enough of a compatible emotion.  However, as in the third example, having “-nya” at the end of several sentences in a row is not unheard of if the character is in the appropriate emotional state.

Rule 6.5: Ending “nyaaa’s” follow the same frequency rules as ending “nya’s” with one exception; when extra emotional clarity is necessary, but the sentence ends in an altered word, Separating “nyaaa” into it’s own sentence followed by three periods, just like as mentioned in Rule 6.3, is acceptable.
 
Example:

I hope that I can still be helpful, even if it’s only occasionyally.  Nyaaa…

 
Rule 6.6: In order to accurately predict where ending “nya’s” and “nyaaa’s” go, both oral proofreading and getting into character are required.

I can’t stress this point enough.  Oral proofreading is a really handy, albeit tiresome, tool to have when you’re checking for errors and when dealing with my nyaccent, it’s literally essential, especially considering how my nyaccent wreaks havoc with spell checkers.  Even after practicing for months, I still need to orally proofread to see where all the “nya’s” and “nyaaa’s” fit; there is no other way around this.  Don’t forget to sync your emotional wavelength with your character’s, either.  I also recommend finding someplace at least relatively private for obvious reasons.  On the plus side, I have found that speaking in my nyaccent makes me feel really giddy and hopefully it will do the same for you, too.

Rule 7: Being Considerate to the Reader

Obviously, readers are important.  However, some may be confused by the sudden change in the manner of speech.  The easiest way to help the reader understand what he or she is reading is to use the context to help compensate for the sudden appearance of seemingly foreign words, but there are other accommodations that I recommend implementing as well.

Rule 7.1: Altered words are shown in italics.
 
The italics serve two purposes.  First, they warn the reader that the word isn’t in everyday English.  Second, they indicate that the word was intentionally spelled in such a manner.  About the only time I don’t use the italics for altered words is when I have blocks of text already in italics for a separate reason.  If this is the case, I will pull the altered words out of italics for the same differentiation.

Rule 7.2: Use caution with contractions.

This is a gray area that is potentially open to interpretation.  Except for the apostrophe “s” that commonly shows possession, etc., I generally prefer to steer clear of putting altered words into contractions.  One notable exception is “you’re” which becomes “nyor” due to the pronunciation, courtesy of Rule 1.

Rule 7.3: If there is an abbreviation or number that would normally be altered by my nyaccent or if there’s a word that normally sounds like it’s been already altered by my nyaccent, it’s left alone in the text without even italics.  However, the changes will still be spoken aloud.

This one’s pretty self-explanatory.

Rule 7.4: If it is meant to help the reader understand what the word originally was, an altered word may be changed further to clarify pronunciation.

A good example of this is the word “our.”  Normally it’s left alone, but it can fall under the influence of Rule 5.  In such cases, it would normally be spelled “nyour,” but that makes it look too close to “your.”  Instead, I spell it as “nyowr” in order to help get the proper pronunciation across.  For the same reason, “your” and “you’re” become “nyor”

Rule 7.5: If a word becomes altered to such a degree that the reader might not understand it and Rule 7.4 isn’t feasible, follow the altered word with the original inserted in brackets.  Additionally, brackets can be used to encompass a word or phrase (like a book or movie title) that for some reason may need to be kept unaltered; in such a case, my nyaccent implied in text, but still spoken aloud.  Italics follow conventional grammar rules in this case.

Examples:

• How did nyu nyanyage [manage] that?”
• Have nyu seen the movie, [Magical Nougat Surprise Humor?]


Rule 8: When in Doubt, Sound It Out

Rule 8 is basically a rehash of Rule 1 with a little bit of Rule 6.6 sprinkled in, but it just goes to show how essential the concept is to my nyaccent.  When spoken, my nyaccent is supposed to feel natural.  Rule 8 is the go-to rule whenever I’m unsure about whether a word should be altered or not.  Sometimes it takes more than one application and sometimes I end up changing my nyaccent slightly.  Either way, there’s no getting around the fact that my nyaccent requires quite a bit of practice and a certain amount of proficiency in the English language to use effectively.

Writing in this fashion can be like a form of weight training, but at the same time, it can be rather fun-nya. ;3